# Quantitative neurobiological evidence for accelerated brain aging in alcohol dependence

**url:** https://www.nature.com/articles/s41398-017-0037-y

---

Tests the [premature aging hypothesis](https://github.com/SudeshnaBora/Topics/blob/main/Definitions.md#PrematureAgingHypothesis).

**Findings:** 

1. Both Alcohol disorder and aging reduced grey matter volume (particular frontal (cingulate cortex , middle frontal gyrus), 
cerebellar and superior temporal regions).

2. The strong similarity between AD- and age-related GML invites two possible - 

The neurotoxic effects of excessive alcohol intake are, at a fundamental biological level, comparable to deteriorating effects of the aging brain.
This maybe caused due to chronic oxidative stress. Oxidative stress has been found to increase both with aging25 and (in model organisms) with
excessive ethanol exposure.

3. An average increase of the brain age of 4 years relative to chronological age, thus demonstrating that alcohol-related brain aging was 
substantial in relation to the human lifespan.

4. Each kg of alcohol consumption corresponded to approximately half a day of brain aging.

5. While brain aging was highest in the oldest AD subjects of our cohort (ages 60–69; 11.7 ± 2.4 years), no brain aging was detectable in the youngest AD subjects
 (ages 20–29). These results resonate with both the [accelerated aging hypothesis](https://github.com/SudeshnaBora/Topics/blob/main/Definitions.md#AcceleratedAgingHypothesis)
 and the [vulnerability hypothesis](https://github.com/SudeshnaBora/Topics/blob/main/Definitions.md#VulnerabilityHypothesis). 
 In line with the accelerated aging hypothesis (but contrary to the vulnerability hypothesis), brain aging was measurable throughout the lifetime, 
 with the exception of only the youngest AD subjects tested. On the other hand, the results did show more pronounced alcohol-related brain aging with increasing 
 chronological age. This pattern, as well as the indication of protective factors in the youngest AD subjects, are in accordance with the vulnerability hypothesis. 
 Overall, our results thus suggest a middle ground between the accelerated aging hypothesis and the vulnerability hypothesis, evidencing accelerated brain aging 
 in all but the youngest individuals with AD and a progressive vulnerability to brain aging with increasing chronological age.

**Scope for future studies:**
1. Investigate whether other factors that cause GML, such as chronic stress or psychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders, 
exhibit patterns of GML that are likewise comparable to the pattern of the aging brain.

2. Relatively small number of females (16%) in this study, potentially masking effects of gender,
and possible side effects of physical or mental comorbidities on GML, that may have not been fully prevented
by controlling for general health status (WHODAS-II) and by excluding participants with non-AD mental disorders.





